
Hi, my name is Xavier Maquilón and this is my journey through tech, since the first time i saw a computer, until now, September 2026.
Just a note that early tech was hard to get here in Ecuador, so "new tech" here was like 3-4 years old in the USA.
This will be a long wall of text, so be advised.

The first time i saw a computer was when i saw my dad working with one, i think he was transcribing handwritten documents in manila folders into the PC and then printing them in a dot matrix printer, i still remember connecting them with a parallel port cable.
I think it was an IBM PC, no GUI, only a black screen with i think it was green text, horizontal pc case with two switches and a floppy disk port, that's it.
I remember just typing my name, my brother's name and my parents in it like a thousand times, and everything i was hearing i was typing it as much as i can. Then my dad printed like five pages of them, it was the best thing ever.
I loved those cables by the way, and until today i'm still amazed by the VGA one, you could lift the monitor attached to it, or the motherboard plus the pc case.

After that i remember my mom bought a "home pc" for all of us to use, i think it was a Compaq, this time it was the real deal, a vertical pc case, a floppy drive AND a cd-rom drive, and let's not forget... the monitor screen protector that had those little hangers that you had to put into the monitor because the monitor had like little holes in it.
This was the first time that i really started to play around computers, it was Windows 98, it came with pre-installed games, all of them were demos except "3D Pinball Space Cadet", i remember playing only that game a lot, also "Doom", "Wolfenstein 3D" and "Duke Nukem 3D" i could only play the first level because, well, demos. Also a point-and-click game was there "Day of the Tentacle", point-and-click games have a special place in my heart.
I had a blast drawing stuff in "Paint" i think it was better than playing the demos, i remember drawing four default-sized squares with anything inside, then with a program that was use to print photos, i think it was a Lexmark software, i just took the four drawings and put them into the software and print them, ant it printed like it was a comic panel, it was amazing.
Also Windows in that time, well, of course, it was pretty simple, that a kid like me could just mess around and find a lot of stuff to do. For example, changing themes and screensavers, my favorite one was "Mystery".

The year was 2000, my country's inflation was through the roof, economic crisis everywhere, i was almost 10 years old i believe, i didn't know much about anything to be honest, but i remember... i remember trying to buy an ice cream that was like a 1000 Sucres in that time, super cheap, and the old guy told me that the ice cream is way more pricey now, not a 1000 Sucres, but 25.000 now. It was so weird to me, i didn't unterstand it. Later my parents told me about everything. We changed the local currency to the American Dollar (USD). "Desperate times call for desperate measures". And it worked, of course, a lot of people couldn't even get their money back from the banks because of the collapse of the old currency.
My country took some steps back from technology back then, the conversion of the currency, price tags, etc, it took time to get it right. And after that, when all the things settled down, i started to enjoy again... the new tech.

2000s tech, the peak of technology, well at least for me, more like a golden age of tech, everything was so portable, transparent, see-through, it was all so beautiful.
At that time i remember a little office across the park that i used to go to play with my friends/neighbors, they threw boxes full of tech, from floppy disks to cds, hdds, rams, etc, it was insane, so my brother and one of his friends ask them if they can take the boxes that they threw away and they say yes, but if something breaks our pc it's not going to be their fault, my brother was like "yeah yeah sure" and that started my journey into IT.
Most of the stuff were broken to be honest, but some of them don't, so it was like a 50/50, and we got new tech, free ram upgrade, free hdds and some floppy disk drives and cd-rom ones. Why did they just throw away all this stuff? Simple, most of the hdds were full of malware and the floppy and cd-rom drives were stuck. So i saw my brother and my brother's friend trying to break into the drives and just remove any dirt and in some of then were toothpicks and we were like HUH? and then we learned that you could just put a paper clip in a little hole and take out the tray haha.
Also my brother and his friend removed all the viruses from the used HDDs, that's where i learn how to use antiviruses, in that time Symantec Norton and Panda Security were the only ones that were good and also sold here.
They were some Windows XP CD Upgrades, like, sealed, new, at least 10 of them, when we ask them again if they don't need those CDs they said "no, our computers are fine", so, we upgrade our Windows 98 into XP for free.
Also there was like a Windows XP Home CD, that's were i learned how to install and format HDDs. In that time you have to put every kilobyte of your HDD type it and that's it, if you wanted partitions, well, a calculator and you divided and that's it.

After all of that, i started to build computers with the used parts that they were throwing away, or at least testing every single one of them if something was broken, tag it as "broken" with a little of those orange sticker labels.
My brother and i changed our pc into a Frankenstein's Monster, RAM slots? full, HDDs? 4 of them (IDE cables, master and slave, i learned that too), Floppy drives and CD-Rom drives? of course we have those. And with all the gadgets, the computer, well... it was just a home PC haha, it wasn't the best, but my brother and I just transformed our basic home pc into basic home pc deluxe, so to speak, and it was awesome.

In the meantime, my mom bought me a Nokia 3100 as my first phone, it was, well a basic Nokia phone, i was around 14-15 years old. And later my friend Nelson gave a cable that you can connect into your computer and transfer photos, videos, etc, into your phone it was something else, i remember learning about Symbian and Series 40 OS, that's were i started thinking that every device has it's own OS.

At this time, internet access were almost affordable for homes, even if internet were a thing since 1999-2000, affordable prices appeared almost as late as 2007.
"Ciber-cafés" were pretty big, i think all around Latinamerica, we just call them "cybers" here. For $1 you could use a computer for 1 hour, that's it. There was one "cyber" just around my house, that's were i learned about networking. I went with a couple of friends there to play Counter Strike, Warcraft 3 and Call of Duty, and in those games you could easily mod stuff or add custom maps, and sometimes "download over internet" didn't work, so i created a folder named "custom-maps" or "mods" and share it across the network (LAN), they could easily see the folder in "My PC" and just drag the file into the maps folder for example, basic stuff.

This is were i started to "work", i put work between "" because i was just "the guy that knows about computers", once or twice a week so i can get enough money to go to the movies with my friends or LAN parties in the weekends to play games. It was the must fun that i had, some of the work were just removing malware or just reinstalling windows, format an additional HDD because windows won't recognize it, some of them were about replacing parts, etc. Pretty much everything that i already knew and did a lot since i was a kid. It was just a puzzle for me, or playing with legos.

My mom bought us, once again, a new computer, this time, with Windows Vista and also internet access, it was a good computer. I LOVED aero glass, i know people what used to hate it, the transparency effects, the "glass", etc.
It was a new windows experience, with XP i only changed the theme for "Zune Theme" and that's it. But with Vista, oh my god, i had a lot of stuff, but they changed the places where the certain configs were, but i was okay.
At this point with a good computer and internet access the "fun times" changed into "learning times", and the best part was that i learned while i was playing with my friends online.
The "cybers" were dying since internet access was so much affordable. That made me sad.

Then around 2009-2010 i went to a speech about "open software" in a college where they gave us an Ubuntu DVD, i learned about it, it was really cool, it was like a "fresh" alternative for Windows.
I went straight home, made a partition just in case, and install Ubuntu in that partition, it was pretty easy and for the first time i saw that the updates, upgrades and installing new software were from a domain ending in .ec, it was from my country! That made me wonder what more can i do with Ubuntu, and started to learn about Linux, and Ubuntu was just a "flavor" of it. But i really liked it, the layout, the icons, the sounds, they were so soft and some kind of calm, the cursors too. But when i wanted to play videogames i just dual booted into the Windows Vista partition, in that time Linux wasn't prepared for them, even though Wine was really good and they had native support, but not in every game. Unfortunately i switched back to Windows when i got a copy of Windows 7 and i forgot about Linux for a long time.

Windows 7... my favorite Windows OS, that's when i started to learn about EVERYTHING tech related. In that time we wanted to play games online but we had to join the same server all at once and try to not get kicked out because of the ping (the routing between Ecuador and the USA was a nightmare, we were playing with like 200ms), so i learned how to make dedicated servers of the game since they came with it on Steam, the dedicated server tools, i learned how to make the map rotations, the config, the timer of the bomb in Counter-Strike, how many rounds we're gonna play, etc. Ran the dedicated server tool but... how can my friends log in? V-P-Ns, God bless them, i was in love with them, with anything virtual to be honest, so, we tried Hamachi from LogMeIn, worked a charm. We were playing "LAN" with only 20ms and not 200ms, every game that we wanna play, i started to learn about it, download the SDK if it needs one from Steam, read the Wiki, the config files, how to edit them, where to put them, do i need to create folders? or the game will make them for me at the very first start?

At this time in my life i was learning about almost everything, i was working with computers, i was still the "computer guy" the "my son's friend knows a lot about computers", my friend's fathers were calling my for any trouble they had with their computer, at work, at their homes, friends of friends of them, etc. I just knew stuff, and if i didn't, how hard could it be? it has a wiki? i can read, i can search around for workarounds, drivers? easy, maintenance, a lot of dust, etc? easy, build a computer from scratch? since i was a kid, it's just like playing with legos, a little bit more expensive, of course. I didn't know i could get paid with this, i was thinking about computers, i was thinking about solving the problems, how they break, how can i make them work again, is it really broken? or just being a computer? God i want to destroy this printer, i hate wireless printers.

I skipped Windows 8, i don't think it was a really good OS, i mean the tiles just... nope.
But i was still learning from Windows 7, everything, every little detail, when i fixed something and learned about how did it crash or break, i learned something new.
A printer was giving me a headache because it could ring home and auto update into new drivers, etc, didn't have an option to disable auto updates and they needed that software, it was obligatory. Well... i'll block the internet connection for the software, that's how i learned about Firewalls, TCP/UDP and hosts file. God i hate printers, but thank you for teaching me about all those things.
Also i never ditched Linux entirely, i also learned about VIRTUAL MACHINES, a computer INSIDE your computer, just download the .iso, and install it right into your computer, you pick how much power does your virtual machine need or you want, so i was also keeping with linux when a new distro came up or a new version of Ubuntu.

The time just keep passing by, my mom got me a Samsung S5 for my birthday, it was a really good phone... i learned about Odin, the software that let you flash firmware into it. I always had the latest Android version even though it's not real in my country, just flashed a firmware from another country, everyting works, my sim, my wifi, bluetooth, everything, and then what i learn about it? Android uses a Linux kernel... Linux... again.
Also, modified OS were AWESOME, i unlocked my Samsung bootloader, start giving it custom OS with custom bootloaders, TWRP i remember them so vividly, IT COULD FLASH .ZIPS, and you can make almost everything with it.
I couldn't modify some system files, that was sad, but then i learned... about rooting your android device, i got access to every file of my phone, i could literally just delete everything and make it like a paper weight if i want to, but no, i started to take modified another level, no more modified versions so to speak, i saw that the phone came with a lot of things that i didn't use, now that i have root access i can delete, can i... debloat my phone? YES, YES I COULD! Took everything out, let a "TouchWiz" OS, well, the flavor of Samsung phones used to have, and make a lightweight version, it was fast, it was snappy, it was... broken! so i fixed it, and when it broke again, i'll fixed it again, no more crashes, no more frozen screen, nothing, it was perfect, just the way i wanted. And that pointed out into... can i do the same thing, with my computer?

Performance boosts, snappy feeling, less booting time and login into the OS. I've only used TuneUp Utilities because i download that program, but it did basic stuff, cleaning cache, cleaning unwanted .ink files from the desk, stuff like that, but to make my windows as fast as my phone, could it be possible? YES! I started learning on what things that Windows REALLY needs, what they do, is it really neccesary? will it break if i remove it? and if it does, i'll fix it and i'll continue. They were a lot of modified Windows 7 OS, but i didn't like them, modified hosts files, modified firewall options, modified registry? no thanks. I only want the things i need and i'll remove everything else.
Couple of days later i had it, my perfect Windows 7 version, debloated, snappy, boot times are better. It wasn't the best, it wasn't like the ultimate Windows or something like that, just, things i didn't want to, since i was using alternatives for Windows programs INSIDE windows, i just removed the programs i didn't need. Internet Explorer, Windows Media Player, etc, i was using Firefox and VLC for example. Something like that.

Then one day when i logged in into my computer, there was a notification: "your pc is ready for your free upgrade". Windows 10.
I did it, like in the first time the notification went up, people were hating on it, i didn't seem to really liked it at first, but it was like Windows 7, but the corners were SHARP, all squares and rectangles, not glass, nor curved corners, only some transparency effects and animations, since Windows 8 they started to use the term "apps" but i wasn't a replace for "programs" it was kinda weird at first too, but it was just those little things that bothered me, no big deal to be honest.
I was still modifying my windows os, trying to make it into my liking, in the meantime, with the virtual machine, i was playing with Linux Mint, the bars, the "dock" to make it look like a macOS, change anything i didn't like and add a lot of stuff i really like, and i was frustrated that i couldn't make that with Windows, i was just trying to debloat it and make it faster, disabling background apps, unncessary stuff that i didn't know i had installed, default programs that i don't even know their names, change them back to the programs i'm used to and that's it, fresh Windows 10 install, debloated, no background apps, no unncessary stuff, just the way i like it.

Later in time, still on Windows 10 with Virtual Machines with linux distros, i had tried various distros, getting familiar with their package managers: apt, dnf, pacman. And if some other distro is better at performance or quality, or anything, the real thing is, they don't, i was still using Mint as my daily "vm driver", because it worked and that's it, i liked Fedora and Arch, installing Arch from scratch was really something, but i really enjoyed it, it's all what i liked in an operating system, with Arch you "build" it from scratch, just installing the things you really need/want. Even thought Mint was my safe or sweet spot for linux distros, i really loved Arch Linux, because it's just the way i like my things.

I was still working with technology, solving problems, fixing stuff, building computers, i made a friend that has until today a shop of computer parts, so i would buy from him and build a computer for a client and that's it.
Made some networking too, switches, routers, etc. The problem with that are the ISPs here in my country, they block you from accessing the router settings and make the work 1000 times hard. You have to call them, talk to them about what you need, if you need some kind of port forwarding, making sure that the NAT is not stricted, UPnP, etc. Just making your work harder for no reasing, but oh well.

We started playing Minecraft with some friends, same thing, VPN, "LAN", but sometimes we wanted a really dedicated server, sometimes i just didn't turn off my computer at night, so it'll run the server overnight, but sometimes the game will flagged you as AFK and sometimes it will like disconnect you for "saving resources" i guess, like, you're not really doing anything so get out kind of thing.
So i searched around dedicated servers, wanted to pay for one at least for one or two months and i got into a forum and i just read that you can make your own Minecraft server with a really old PC, headless, and that's it, i didn't know any of these stuff, so i started to read about it, searched for it, watched a youtube video and that's it... a headless debian minecraft dedicated server. With one of my old computers what i had just lying around a i5 4440 with 24gb of ram ddr3 1333mhz and 2tb hdd. I download a debian iso, installed it, no GUI, just the SSH, but it under my desk and then i started to download and running everything that i need for my Minecraft server and even though i went into every config file and make the server and my friends join the server, they were a lot of tools for that, like an easy way to setup your server with just 5 clicks or something like that, but hey, i learned how to do it with the CLI, no worries.

Some time passed by and i was going to do a project with a friend's dad, 20 computers, i had to build them, good for CAD projects, and a little server so they can store the projects and download them from each computer.
We reviewed the budget, i talked with my friend about the parts, he was getting them and then... COVID.
When COVID arrived here, well, we were locked up in our houses, nobody was getting out, and still i got it TWICE, the first one was horrible, the second one wasn't.
I tried to learn how to code, but it wasn't for me, i know the basics of html and css to build websites, maybe some ruby on rails and javascript, but that's it. Basic stuff.
So i went back to the basics, i earned my money by mainly fixing computers remotely, removing viruses, drivers, troubleshooting, debloat and performance boosts, etc.

Then out of nowhere... Windows 11. I'm still using it as today, had a couple of hiccups at the start, nothing too big, started with a fresh install, but, this version of windows came with a lot of stuff preinstalled, and i hate preinstalled stuff, again debloat the OS, break the OS, fix the OS, over and over again until i get it right and i did it. No background apps, no AI, no searching the web in the taskbar or start menu, just the computer, and those are just little things that i don't like, but then again, i'm still here, and i'm still using Windows as my daily driver, but i didn't forget about linux, i have a Fedora KDE installed on my laptop, it's just a basic laptop, but then again, that's what i love about linux, it's a basic laptop, maybe a little old, but it works and it does the things i want it to do.

And when i was getting rid of some stuff lyring around getting dust all over, i stumbled upon the old pc that acted as a server for Minecraft to play with my friends. Gave it a good wipe, got rid of all the dust, fresh paste for the cpu/cooler, boot it up, good as new. Then i started to play around with it, trying to some project with it to not just throw it away/sell it. And then... it just came to me, Proxmox.

Ooooooh i love Proxmox it's mainly the thing that got me into virtual machines, but this is a hypervisor 1, based on debian of course, all roads lead to debian. I installed it, play with it and then i try to make some projects with it, my old minecraft server, i just put it inside my proxmox with a Linux Container (LXC), and now it lives inside my homelab, forever, or well, until the 2tb hdd give up. But it has everything, snapshots, templates, it's just there.
And there are plenty of projects that you can do with proxmox.

And for the last part... i started searching about docker, it's a very cool software, technically you run programs/apps inside an isolated environment and the best part is, if it runs in the docker container, it will run the same in any other computer, it's just the way i like: "it just works".
I have 4 VMs in my proxmox ve, the first one is for docker, it has well, docker, portainer, uptime and kuma. The second one is for Adguard Home, that's the DNS one for blocking unwanted ads. And the last one is for monitorin, it has prometheus and grafana. And the last one, mi minecraft server.

A little note: about AI, i never said anything about it, i think it's cool, i don't like when people use it for literally anything, like not thinking and then say something like "i'll let the AI choose for me", it's weird.
I saw every detail, every step from the beginning of AI, and how has been evolving, from making weird videos and pictures to, well, literally videogames.
I think it's a good tool to save you some time, i mean, i'm going to tell an AI to make all of this wall of text into a good html with some css to upload it, it will save me a lot of time of "< / >"

And that's my journey until now.
It's September 2026, i'm 35 years old.
And i will always love computers and technology.

